# JavaScript API

## Access the global JSS instance

```javascript
import jss from 'jss'
```

## Create an own JSS instance

`jss.create([options])`

Use an own instance if the component you build should be reusable within a different project with a probably different JSS setup.

See `jss.setup()` below for `options` object description.

```javascript
import {create} from 'jss'
const jss = create()
jss.use(somePlugin())
jss.createStyleSheet(/* ... */)
export default jss
```

__Note__: `jss.create(options)` is the same as `jss.create().setup(options)`.

## Setup JSS instance

`jss.setup(options)`

Options:

  - `createGenerateClassName` - a function which returns a function which generates unique class names.
  - `plugins` - an array of functions, will be passed to `jss.use`.
  - `virtual` - if true, JSS will use VirtualRenderer.
  - `insertionPoint` - string value of a DOM comment node which marks the start of sheets or a rendered DOM node. Sheets rendered by this Jss instance are inserted after this point sequentially.

__Note__: Each `jss.setup()` call will overwrite all previous settings.

See [setup examples](./setup.md#specify-dom-insertion-point).

## Quick setup with preset

```javascript
import preset from 'jss-preset-default'
import jss from 'jss'

jss.setup(preset())
```

## Add a plugin

`jss.use(plugin)`

```javascript
import global from 'jss-global'
import jss from 'jss'

jss.use(global())
```

## Create Style Sheet

`jss.createStyleSheet([styles], [options])`

Classes are always generated by default.

Options:

- `media` - media query - attribute of style element.
- `meta` - meta information about this style - attribute of style element, for e.g. you could pass component name for easier debugging.
- `link` - link jss `Rule` instances with DOM `CSSRule` instances so that styles, can be modified dynamically, false by default because it has some performance cost.
- `element` - style element, will create one by default.
- `index` - 0 by default - determines DOM rendering order, higher number = higher specificity (inserted after).
- `generateClassName` - a function that generates a unique class name.
- `classNamePrefix` - a string, which will be added at the beginning of the class name in development.

```javascript
const sheet = jss.createStyleSheet({
  // "button" is a rule name, class is generated.
  button: {
    width: 100,
    height: 100
  }
}, {media: 'print'}).attach()

console.log(sheet.classes.button) // button-d4f43g
```

```html
<style media="print">
  .button-d4f43g {
    width: 100px;
    height: 100px;
  }
</style>
```

## Create a Style Sheet with global selectors

You need to have [jss-global](https://github.com/cssinjs/jss-global) plugin installed.

## Style Sheets registry

`SheetsRegistry`

When rendering on the server, you will need to get all rendered styles as a CSS string.
SheetsRegistry class allows you to __manually__ aggregate and stringify them. Read [more about SSR](./ssr.md).

```javascript
import jss, {SheetsRegistry} from 'jss'

const sheets = new SheetsRegistry()
const sheet = jss.createStyleSheet()
sheets.add(sheet)
sheets.toString() // Returns CSS of all attached Style Sheets together.
```

## Style Sheets Manager

`SheetsManager`

Counts how many elements use the same Style Sheet and automatically attach or detach it. It also acts similar to a WeakMap, because one can use an object as a key. React-JSS is using a `theme` object as a key to identify a sheet by a theme.

```javascript
import jss, {SheetsManager} from 'jss'

const manager = SheetsManager()
manager.size // 0
const sheet = jss.createStyleSheet()
const key = {}

manager.add(key, sheet) // index
manager.size // 1
manager.get(key) // sheet

// Will attach the sheet and count refs.
manager.manage(key) // sheet
// Will detach the sheet if refs count is 0.
manager.unmanage(key)
```

## Remove a Style Sheet

`jss.removeStyleSheet(sheet)`

Detach the Style Sheet and remove it from the registry.

## Attach Style Sheet

`sheet.attach()`

Insert Style Sheet into the render tree. Call it to make your Style Sheet visible for the layout.

## Detach Style Sheet

`sheet.detach()`

Detaching unused Style Sheets will speedup every DOM node insertion and manipulation as the browser will have to do less lookups for css rules potentially to be applied to the element.

## Attach Style Sheets in a specific order

Sheet 1 has a higher index (priority), and as such will come **after** sheet 2 in the resulting DOM.

```javascript
const sheet1 = jss.createStyleSheet({}, {index: 5, meta: 'sheet-1'}).attach()
const sheet2 = jss.createStyleSheet({}, {index: 1, meta: 'sheet-2'}).attach()
```

```html
<style type="text/css" data-meta="sheet-2"></style>
<style type="text/css" data-meta="sheet-1"></style>
```

## Add a rule to an existing Style Sheet

`sheet.addRule([name], style, [options])`

### Options

- `index` - index where the rule should be added, by default, rules are pushed at the end.
- `className` - add a rule with a predefined class name.

### Add a rule dynamically

```javascript
const rule = sheet.addRule({
  padding: 20,
  background: 'blue'
})
document.body.innerHTML = `<button class="${rule.className}">Button</button>`
```

## Delete a rule from an existing Style Sheet

`sheet.deleteRule(name)`

To remove a rule from the DOM, Style Sheet option `link: true` should be used.
Returns `true` if rule has been removed from the DOM.

## Get a rule

`sheet.getRule(name)`

Access a rule within sheet by a name.

```javascript
// Using name.
const rule = sheet.getRule('myButton')
```

## Add multiple rules

`sheet.addRules(styles)`

In case you want to add rules to the sheet separately or even at runtime.

```javascript
sheet.addRules({
  myButton: {
    float: 'left',
  },
  something: {
    display: 'none'
  }
})
```

## Update function values

`sheet.update(data)`

If you use [function values](./json-api.md#function-values), you will want to update them with new data. This method will call all your function values, pass the `data` param and update the CSS Rule if needed.

```javascript
sheet.update({
  // Any data here.
})
```

## Create a rule without a Style Sheet

`jss.createRule([name], style, [options])`

Apply styles directly to the element but still be able to use JSS.

```javascript
const rule = jss.createRule({
  padding: 20,
  background: 'blue'
})

const rule = jss.createRule('@media', {
  button: {
    color: 'red'
  }
})
```

## Apply a rule to an element inline

`rule.applyTo(element)`

This is equivalent to `element.style.background = 'blue'` except that you could use a rule from sheet which is already defined. It uses `rule.toJSON()` internally, so same limitations are applied. [Example](http://cssinjs.github.io/examples/inline/index.html).

```javascript
jss.createRule({
  background: 'blue'
}).applyTo(element)
```

## Set or get a rule property dynamically

`rule.prop(name, [value])`

When the `link` option is true, after Style Sheet is attached, linker saves references to `CSSRule` instances so that you are able to set rule properties at any time. [Example](http://cssinjs.github.io/examples/dynamic-props/index.html).

```javascript
const sheet = jss.createStyleSheet({
  a: {
    color: 'red'
  }
}, {link: true})

// Get the color.
sheet.getRule('a').prop('color') // red

// Set the color.
sheet.getRule('a').prop('color', 'green')
```

## Convert a rule to JSON

`rule.toJSON()`

Returns JSON representation of a rule. Only regular rules are supported,
no nested, conditionals, keyframes or fallbacks.

Result of `toJSON` call can be used later to apply styles inline to the element.
It is used by `rule.applyTo()`.

## Convert to CSS

`sheet.toString()`

If you want to get a pure CSS string from JSS for e.g. when preprocessing server side.

```javascript
import jss from 'jss'

const sheet = jss.createStyleSheet({
  button: {
    float: 'left'
  }
})

console.log(sheet.toString())
```

```css
.button-d4f43g {
  float: left;
}
```

## Generate your own class names

`createGenerateClassName`

Option `createGenerateClassName` allows you to specify a function which returns a class name generator function `generateClassName(rule, sheet)`. This pattern is used to allow JSS reset the counter upon factory invocation, when needed. For example, it is used in [React-JSS](https://github.com/cssinjs/react-jss) to reset the counter on each request for server-side rendering.

By default class names generator uses a simple counter to ensure uniqueness of the class names. It consists of `classNamePrefix` Style Sheet option + rule name + counter. __Note__: in production (`NODE_ENV=production`) it uses just the `c` + rules counter.

```javascript
import jss from 'jss'

const createGenerateClassName = () => {
  let counter = 0

  return (rule, sheet) => `pizza--${rule.key}-${counter++}`
}

jss.setup({createGenerateClassName})

const sheet = jss.createStyleSheet({
  button: {
    float: 'left'
  }
})

console.log(sheet.toString())
```

```css
.pizza--button-1 {
  float: left;
}
```

## Extract dynamic styles

`getDynamicStyles(styles)`

Extracts a styles object with only props that contain function values. Useful when you want to share a static part between different elements and render only the dynamic styles separate for each element.

```javascript
const dynamicStyles = getDynamicStyles({
  button: {
    fontSize: 12,
    color: data => data.color
  }
})

// Returns only styles with dynamic values.
{
  button: {
    color: data => data.color
  }
}
```

## Plugins

See [plugins](./plugins.md) documentation.
